世卫组织关于2019冠状病毒病病例超过10万的声明

Tina空中微课堂推出的医学英语术语学课程做优惠啦！有兴趣的小伙伴戳开看看啦!《医学英语术语学》系列课程, 优惠活动开启啦！
最新讲话-WHO总干事对新冠病毒疫情媒体通报会

Tina现在每天的常规工作就是早上听新闻，google,youtube能找到的关于美国新冠新闻几乎一个不那的全部看完。大家有兴趣可以看看我前几天写的一篇文章-新冠疫情下，我在美国呆得心慌慌！美国疾控中心CDC官网上关于美国新冠确诊人数、检测人数、死亡人数，和各州确诊人数等数据已经非常滞后和不准确了。相对而言，worldmeters和纽约时报的更新还是比较及时的。在这场与病毒的斗争中，没有国家政府可以置身事外。希望人类能尽快找到控制病毒蔓延的方法！希望研发疫苗早日成功！
Stay healthy and stay strong!
数据来源：

https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/#countries
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-us-cases.html

WHO statement on cases of COVID-19 surpassing 100000
As of today’s reports, the global number of confirmed cases of COVID-19 has surpassed 100 000. As we mark this sombre moment, the World Health Organization (WHO) reminds all countries and communities that the spread of this virus can be significantly slowed or even reversed through the implementation of robust containment and control activities. 
根据到今天为止获得的报告，全球2019冠状病毒病（COVID-19）确诊病例数已超过10万例。在我们纪念这一严峻时刻之际，世界卫生组织（世卫组织）提醒所有国家和社区，采取强有力的遏制和控制活动，可大大减缓甚至逆转这一病毒的传播。
China and other countries are demonstrating that spread of the virus can be slowed and impact reduced through the use of universally applicable actions, such as working across society to identify people who are sick, bringing them to care, following up on contacts, preparing hospitals and clinics to manage a surge in patients, and training health workers.
中国和其他国家的行动表明，可以通过采取普遍适用的措施来减缓病毒的传播并减少影响，这些行动包括：通过全社会努力来查找和治疗病人，追踪接触者，使医院和诊所做好病人剧增时的处理准备，以及培训卫生工作者。
WHO calls on all countries to continue efforts that have been effective in limiting the number of cases and slowing the spread of the virus. 
世卫组织呼吁所有国家继续做出努力，以有效抑制病例数量并减缓病毒传播。
Every effort to contain the virus and slow the spread saves lives. These efforts give health systems and all of society much needed time to prepare, and researchers more time to identify effective treatments and develop vaccines. 
遏制病毒和减缓传播的每一项努力都可挽救生命。这些努力可使卫生系统和整个社会有宝贵的时间进行准备，也使研究人员有更多的时间确定有效治疗方法并开发疫苗。
Allowing uncontrolled spread should not be a choice of any government, as it will harm not only the citizens of that country but affect other countries as well. 
不采取控制措施，任由疫情蔓延，不应是任何政府的选择，这不仅对本国国民造成伤害，还会殃及其他国家。
We must stop, contain, control, delay and reduce the impact of this virus at every opportunity. Every person has the capacity to contribute, to protect themselves, to protect others, whether in the home, the community, the healthcare system, the workplace or the transport system. 
我们必须利用一切机会来阻止、遏制、控制、拖延和减少这一病毒带来的影响。无论在家里、社区、医疗卫生系统、工作场所还是在交通系统，人人都能够出一份力，保护自己，保护他人。
Leaders at all levels and in all walks of life must step forward to bring about this commitment across society. 
各级领导和各行各业的领袖必须挺身而出，在全社会实现这一承诺。
WHO will continue to work with all countries, our partners and expert networks to coordinate the international response, develop guidance, distribute supplies, share knowledge and provide people with the information they need to protect themselves and others.
世卫组织将继续与所有国家、我们的合作伙伴和专家网络合作，协调开展国际应对，制定指导方针，分发物资，分享知识，并向人们提供保护自己和他人所需的信息。