世卫组织总干事在二十国集团领导人应对新冠肺炎特别峰会上的讲话

世卫组织总干事在2020年3月26日召开的二十国集团领导人应对COVID-19特别峰会上的讲话
兄弟姐妹们:
My brothers and sisters,

我们会聚在一起，讨论如何应对当今时代面临的这场空前卫生危机。
We come together to confront the defining health crisis of our time.

我们正与病毒交战。若放任不管，这一病毒将会击垮我们。
We are at war with a virus that threatens to tear us apart – if we let it.

将近50万人已被感染，2万多人丧生。
Almost half a million people have already been infected, and more than 20,000 have lost their lives.

大流行疫情正以指数速度蔓延。
The pandemic is accelerating at an exponential rate.

第一个10万病例用了67天，第二个10万病例用了11天，而第三个10万病例只用了4天，第四个10万病例仅用了2天。
The first 100 thousand cases took 67 days. The second 100 thousand took 11 days, the third 100 thousand took just 4 days and the fourth 100 thousand just 2 days.

如果各国不大力采取行动，数以百万计的人可能会死亡。
Without aggressive action in all countries, millions could die.

只有时间才能告诉我们疫情究竟将造成多大的社会、经济和政治后果。
The full social, economic and political fallout, only time will tell.

但我们知道，我们最终付出的代价取决于我们现在做出的选择。
But we know that the price we end up paying depends on the choices we make now.

这是一场全球危机，需要全球应对。
This is a global crisis that demands a global response.

今天，我对各位尊敬的领导人提出三项请求：
Today, I have three requests for our esteemed leaders:

首先是战斗，努力战斗，拼命战斗。
First, fight. Fight hard. Fight like hell.

勇猛投入战斗，挽救自己和他人的生命。
Fight like your lives depend on it – because they do.

阻断病毒是保护生命、生计和经济的最好也是唯一的方法。
The best and only way to protect life, livelihoods and economies is to stop the virus.

没有借口。不留遗憾。
No excuses. No regrets.

感谢你们的政府和人民为此做出的牺牲。
Thank you for the sacrifices your governments and people have already made.

你们许多国家实施了严厉的社会和经济限制措施，关闭了学校和企业，并要求人们呆在家里。
Many of your countries have imposed drastic social and economic restrictions, shutting schools and businesses, and asking people to stay at home.

这些措施将会减弱流行强度，但不会扑灭疫情。
These measures will take some of the heat out of the epidemic, but they will not extinguish it.

我们必须做得更多。
We must do more.

我们必须立即建立、扩大、培训和部署卫生工作者队伍，发现、检测、隔离和治疗每个病例，追踪每个接触者。
We must immediately build, expand, train and deploy health workers to find, test, isolate and treat every case and trace every contact.

 这不是可有可无的事，这是一种义务。
This is not an option; it’s an obligation.

其次是团结。
Second, unite.

没有任何国家能够独自化解这场危机。
No country can solve this crisis alone.

我们需要同舟共济，只有这样，才能一道走出困境。
We’re all in this together, and we will only get out of it together.

这需要彻底改变做法，全球团结互助，各国分享经验、知识和资源，努力保持供应线畅通，并向需要援助的国家提供支持。
That means a paradigm shift in global solidarity – in sharing experiences, expertise and resources, and in working together to keep supply lines open, and supporting nations who need our support.

全球个人防护装备短缺问题使一线应急人员处于险境，也使我们所有人处于险境。
The global shortage of personal protective equipment is putting front-line responders in danger – and that puts all of us in danger.

我们呼吁所有国家增加产量，取消出口禁令，确保公平分配物资。
We call on all of your nations to increase production, remove export bans and ensure equity of distribution.

第三，引导。
Third, ignite.

为抗疫重新调整你们国家强大的工业能力。
Repurpose the industrial might of your nations for this effort.

引导全球生产，提供我们需要的拯救生命的工具。
Ignite global production for the tools we need to save lives now.

引导疫苗和疗法创新。
Ignite innovation for vaccines and therapeutics.

引导发起一场全球运动，确保今后不再发生这样的情况。
And ignite a global movement to ensure this never happens again.

我们现在采取的行动将影响未来几十年。
The actions we take now will have consequences for decades to come.

COVID-19使我们损失惨重，但它也给我们带来了团结一致应对共同威胁的机会以及建设共同未来的机会。
COVID-19 is taking so much from us. But it is also giving us something: the opportunity to come together as one against a common threat, and to build a common future.

我们可能说不同的语言，持不同的信仰，但我们同属人类大家庭。
We may speak different tongues and adhere to different creeds, but we are made of the same stuff. We are one human race.

战斗。
Fight.

团结。
Unite.

引导。
Ignite.

我们要坚定决心，再也不能允许这样的事情重演。
And let our singular resolve be: never again.

谢谢国王陛下。谢谢诸位。
Shukran jazeelan, Your Majesty. Thank you so much.