Phase 3 Clinical Testing in the US of AstraZeneca COVID-19 Vaccine Candidate Begins

A multi-site, Phase 3 clinical trial evaluating an investigational COVID-19 vaccine known as AZD1222 has begun. The trial will enroll approximately 30,000 adult volunteers at 80 sites in the United States to evaluate if the candidate vaccine can prevent symptomatic coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). The United Kingdom-based global biopharmaceutical company AstraZeneca is leading the trial as regulatory sponsor. The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), part of the National Institutes of Health, and the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA), part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response, are providing funding support for the trial.

Scientists at NIAID’s Rocky Mountain Laboratories (RML), based in Hamilton, Montana, conducted a preclinical study of AZD1222. Their findings — recently published in Nature(link is external) — indicate the candidate vaccine rapidly induced immune responses against SARS-CoV-2 in mice and rhesus macaques. A single dose of the vaccine protected six rhesus macaques from pneumonia caused by the virus. Based on the RML data, a Phase 1 trial of the candidate vaccine began on April 23 in healthy volunteers in the U.K. Investigators recently reported promising results(link is external) in The Lancet(link is external). Currently, the vaccine candidate is being evaluated in Phase 2/3 trials in the U.K. and Brazil and in a Phase 1/2 trial in South Africa.

The NIAID COVID-19 Prevention Network (CoVPN)(link is external) will participate in the Phase 3 clinical trial of AZD1222 in the U.S. The CoVPN is composed of existing NIAID-supported clinical research networks with infectious disease expertise and is designed for efficient and thorough evaluation of vaccine candidates and monoclonal antibodies for the prevention of COVID-19.

Oxford University’s Jenner Institute and Oxford Vaccine Group developed AZD1222. The candidate vaccine was licensed to AstraZeneca for further development. The vaccine uses a non-replicating chimpanzee adenovirus to deliver a SARS-CoV-2 spike protein to induce an immune response. SARS-CoV-2 is the virus that causes COVID-19.