"If we do a good job with the new vaccines, the healthcare and reproductive health, we can reduce the population by 10 - 15%"

Sara Cunial who is a member of the Italian Parliament has delivered a controversial speed where she is calling for the arrest of Bill Gates. Her speech was recorded and the video was later loaded on Youtube and is making rounds on social platforms.

In her speech Cunial denounced all the lies surrounding the plan to combat Covid-19, accused Bill Gates of genocide for being behind a initiative to criminally reduce world population and also strongly attacked the complicity of the Italian government and parliamentarians on the matter.

MP Cunial is a combative Roman deputy of the mixed group and a graduate in industrial chemistry at the University of Padua. She she was elected to the Chamber of Deputies for the 5-Star Movement as a leader in the Veneto region in 2018.

In April this year, Cunial was detained by local police in Rome, as part of the controls for the coronavirus emergency, while driving on Highway 8 and punished despite having the badge of parliamentarian. 

Just few days after her detention, she broke the decrees of the Conte government in the Chamber.
Now, she has had the courage to denounce what many know and remains silent for validating obscure interests worldwide.

After Cunial's emotional speech, a hashtag #ArrestBillGates started trending on Twitter and more videos of Bill Gates talking about reducing our population started emerging. 

Italian Government calls for Arrest of Bill Gates.
Watch Full Video:https://t.co/t70mw7Wgqm#ArrestBillGates pic.twitter.com/8asVtkozKG

— GPAN (@AfricaRepublic) May 15, 2020
"Represented by the World Health Organisation whose first financier is the 'world savior' and a well known philanthropist Bill Gates, he prophesied a pandemic which was simulated last October during the Event 201. He is committed to develop a depopulation plan and to exercise a dictatorial control over the entire population, aiming to obtain supremacy over agriculture, technology and energy," said MP Cunial.

"He says literally from a declaration of his own: 'If we do a good job with the new vaccines, the healthcare and reproductive health, we can reduce the population by 10 - 15%,'" she added.