What could possibly go wrong with fast-tracking a hastily put-together vaccine to treat an illness with a .26% fatality rate and mass-producing the concoction for dissemination? That’s what some in the medical community want to do with Bill Gates’ new vaccine for coronavirus, which he began working on – curiously – a short time before coronavirus went viral.
What could go wrong has now been made public, as Bill Gates’ shoddily-hastened vaccine has been determined to make all animal test subjects get COVID-19 when exposed to the virus.

Paid for by Manzella for Montana Senate District 44 – Republican. Theresa Manzella, Treasurer. PO Box 1100, Hamilton, MT 59840

The New Statesman reveals that Gates’ new vaccine, backed by Oxford College, failed to prevent the coronavirus among any of its rhesus macaque monkey test subjects, all of which became positive. The discovery caused one medical researcher to say we need an “urgent re-appraisal of the ongoing human trials.”
- Advertisement -
The Oxford Vaccine Group (OVG) spike-protein vaccine has been reportedly fast-tracked and Melinda Gates claims that 30 million people will have the vaccine available on a wide-scale by the end of the year. But will the vaccine stop coronavirus? If testing upon primates is any indication, the answer is a resounding no.
For some reason, the Oxford Vaccine Group said on April 21 that the vaccine was effective. That’s proven untrue, at least according to data released recently.
Elanor Riley of Edinburgh University told Forbes Magazine that not only did monkeys exposed to coronavirus after being vaccinated all got the virus, they passed it to others as easily as those not exposed.
Sadly, one-thousand humans have already been given the “vaccine” and 10,260 adults and children have been slated to receive it, even though it’s proven unsuccessful among its primate test subjects.
- Advertisement -
The question is why Bill Gates and his financial backers on the world stage are so eager to release a vaccine for a relatively non-deadly virus that has been tested and found altogether unsuccessful.